XXXX BC Waun Mawn is built in West Wales
XXXX BC Sumerian cuneiform writing systemX and Egyptian hieroglyphs
XXXX BC Newgrange built in Ireland
XXXX BC Cycladic culture in Greece
XXXX BC Norte Chico civilization begins in Peru
XXXX BC Rise of Proto-Elamite Civilization in Iran
XXXX BC First Dynasty of Egypt
XXXX BC Skara Brae in Scotland
XXXX BC Stonehenge construction begins. In its first version, it consisted of a circular ditch and bank, with XX wooden posts.X
XXXX BC Cucuteni-Trypillian culture in Romania and Ukraine
XXXX BC Jiroft civilization begins in Iran
XXXX BC First known use of papyrus by Egyptians
XXXX-XXXX BC Earliest evidence of autochthonous Iron production in West Africa.X
XXXX-XXXX BC The East African Pastoral neolithic culture builds East Africa's earliest and largest monumental cemetery at Lothagam North Pillar Site. X
XXXX BC Kot Diji phase of the Indus Valley Civilization begins
XXXX BC Longshan culture in China
XXXX BC Minoan Civilization ancient palace city Knossos reach XX,XXX inhabitants
XXXX BC Rise of Elam in Iran
XXXX BC The Epic of Gilgamesh becomes the first written story
XXXX BC The Old Kingdom begins in Egypt
XXXX BC Oldest known surviving literature Sumerian texts from Abu Salabikh, including the Instructions of Shuruppak and the Kesh temple hymn.
XXXX BC Mature Harappan phase of the Indus Valley civilization (in present-day Pakistan and India) begins
XXXX BC Emergence of Maya culture in the Yucatán Peninsula
XXXX BC King Khufu completes the Great Pyramid of Giza. The Land of Punt in the Horn of Africa first appears in Egyptian records around this time.
XXXX-XXXX BC Kerma culture in Nubia
XXXX BC The mammoth goes extinct.
XXXX or XXXX BC Akkadian Empire is founded, dating depends upon whether the Middle chronology or the Short chronology is used
XXXX BC Oldest known depiction of the Staff God, the oldest image of a god to be found in the Americas
XXXX-XXXX BC X kiloyear event a severe aridification phase, likely connected to a Bond event, which was registered throughout most North Africa, Middle East and continental North America. Related droughts very likely caused the collapse of the Old Kingdom in Egypt and of the Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia
XXXX BC completion of Stonehenge
XXXX BC The Middle Kingdom begins in Egypt
XXXX BC Domestication of the horse
XXXX BC Erlitou culture in China
XXXX BC alphabetic writing emerges
XXXX BC The Epic of Gilgamesh is written. Possibly the oldest great work of literaturecontradictory
XXXX BC Oldest Record of Hammurabi's Code.
XXXX BC Indus Valley Civilization comes to an end but is continued by the Cemetery H culture; The beginning of Poverty Point Civilization in North America
XXXX BC Minoan civilization on Crete is destroyed by the Minoan eruption of Santorini island
XXXX BC Mycenaean Greece
XXXX BC The beginning of Shang Dynasty in China, evidence of a fully developed writing system, see Oracle Bone Script
XXXX BC Beginning of Hittite dominance of the Eastern Mediterranean region
c.XXXX BC The New Kingdom begins in Egypt
XXXX BC Composition of the Rigveda is completed
XXXX-XXXX BCE The Proto-sinaitic script is the oldest alphabet created in Egypt.
c.XXXX BC Oldest known song with notation
XXXX-XXX BC Olmec civilization flourishes in Pre-Columbian Mexico, during Mesoamerica's Formative period
XXXX BC The Hallstatt culture
XXXX-XXXX BC Bronze Age collapse in Southwestern Asia and in the Eastern Mediterranean region. This period is also the setting of the Iliad and the Odyssey epic poems (which were composed about four centuries later).
XXXX BC Disintegration of Hittite Empire
XXXX BC Use of Iron spreads.
XXXX BC The Zhou force (led by King Wu of Zhou) overthrow the last king of Shang Dynasty; Zhou Dynasty established in China
XXXX BCE The Phoenician alphabet is created
XXXX BC Nok culture in West Africa
XXXX BC The second stream of Bantu expansion reaches great lakes region of Africa, creating a major population centre.XX
XXX BC Approximate date for the composition of the Iliad and the Odyssey
XXX BC Foundation of Carthage by the Phoenicians in today known Tunisia
XXX BC Rise of Greek city-states
XXX BC Iron Ancient in Sungai Batu (Old Kedah)
c.XXX BC Rise of the Kingdom of Kush
XXX BC First recorded Ancient Olympic Games.
XXX BCE Founding of Rome (traditional date)
XXX BC Tiglath-Pileser III becomes the new king of Assyria. With time he conquers neighboring countries and turns Assyria into an empire.
XXX BC Rise of the Median Empire.
XXX BC Spring and Autumn period begins in China; Zhou Dynasty's power is diminishing; the era of the Hundred Schools of Thought.
XXX BC The construction of Marib Dam in Arabia Felix.
XXX BC Rise of Persian Empire.
XXX-XXXBC The Urewe culture dominates the Great Lakes region. It was one of Africa's oldest iron smelting centres.XXXX
XXX BC An alliance between the Babylonians, Medes, and Scythians succeeds in destroying Nineveh and causing subsequent fall of the Assyrian empire.
XXX BC Pandyan kingdom in South India.
XXX BC Sixteen Maha Janapadas ("Great Realms" or "Great Kingdoms") emerge in India.
XXX BC Evidence of writing system appear in Oaxaca used by the Zapotec civilization.
c. XXX BC Rise of the Sao civilisation near Lake Chad
XXX BCE Siddhartha Gautama (Buddha), founder of Buddhism is born as a prince of the Shakya tribe, which ruled parts of Magadha, one of the Maha Janapadas.
XXX BC Confucius, founder of Confucianism, is born.
XXX BC Foundation of the Achaemenid Empire by Cyrus the Great.
XXX BC Mahavira, founder of Jainism, is born.
XXX BC Cyrus the Great overthrows Croesus King of Lydia.
XXX BC Rise of Magadha as the dominant power under Bimbisara.
XXX BC The fall of the Neo-Babylonian Empire and liberation of the Jews by Cyrus the Great.
XXX BC Death of Cyrus
XXX BC Cambyses II of Persia conquers Egypt.
c. XXX BC Darius I (Darius the Great) of Persia, subjugates eastern Thrace, Macedonia submits voluntarily, and annexes Libya, Persian Empire at largest extent.
XXX BC Expulsion of the last King of Rome, founding of Roman Republic (traditional date).
XXX BC Democracy instituted at Athens
XXX BC Panini standardizes the grammar and morphology of Sanskrit in the text Ashtadhyayi. Panini's standardized Sanskrit is known as Classical Sanskrit.
XXX BCE King Aristagoras of Miletus incites all of Hellenic Asia Minor to rebel against the Persian Empire, beginning the Greco-Persian Wars.
XXX BC Greek city-states defeat Persian invasion at Battle of Marathon
XXX BC Death of Gautama Buddha
XXX BC Persian invasion of Greece by Xerxes; Battles of Thermopylae and Salamis
XXX BC Death of Confucius
XXX BC Warring States period begins in China as the Zhou king became a mere figurehead; China is annexed by regional warlords
XXX/XXX BC Birth of Socrates
XXX BC Murder of Xerxes
XXX BC Birth of Democritus
XXX BC The Oresteia by Aeschylus, the only surviving trilogy of ancient Greek plays, is performed.
XXX BC The Greco-Persian Wars end.
XXX BC Building of the Parthenon at Athens started
XXX BC Construction of the Parthenon is completed
XXX BC Beginning of the Peloponnesian war between the Greek city-states
XXX BC Sophocles's play Oedipus Rex is first performed
XXX BC Birth of Plato
XXX BC Nanda dynasty comes to power.
XXX BC End of the Peloponnesian War
XXX BC Zapotec culture flourishes around city of Monte Albán
c. XXX BC Rise of the Garamantes as an irrigation-based desert state in the Fezzan region of Libya
XXX BCEDeath of Socrates
XXX BC Birth of Aristotle
XXX BC Death of Democritus
XXX BC Alexander the Great defeats Darius III of Persia in the Battle of Gaugamela, completing his conquest of Persia.
XXX BC Alexander the Great defeats Indian king Porus in the Battle of the Hydaspes River.
XXX BC Death of Alexander the Great at Babylon.
XXX BC Death of Aristotle
XXX BC Chandragupta Maurya overthrows the Nanda Dynasty of Magadha.
XXX BC Chandragupta Maurya seizes the satrapies of Paropanisadai (Kabul), Aria (Herat), Arachosia (Qanadahar) and Gedrosia (Baluchistan)from Seleucus I Nicator, the Macedonian satrap of Babylonia, in return for XXX elephants.
c. XXX BC Completion of Euclid's Elements
c. XXX BC Pingala uses zero and binary numeral system
XXX BCE Sangam literature (Tamil சங்க இலக்கியம், Canka ilakkiyam) period in the history of ancient southern India (known as the Tamilakam)
XXX BCE Chola Empire in South India
XXX BCE Construction of the Great Pyramid of Cholula, the world's largest pyramid by volume (the Great Pyramid of Giza built XXXX BCE Egypt stands XXX meters, making it XX meters taller), begins in Cholula, Puebla, Mexico.
XXX BCE Ashoka becomes the emperor of the Mauryan Empire
XXX BCE Kalinga war
XXX BCE Thục Dynasty takes over Việt Nam (then Kingdom of Âu Lạc)
XXX BCE Ashoka sends a Buddhist missionary led by his son who was Mahinda Thero (Buddhist monk) to Sri Lanka (then Lanka) Mahinda (Buddhist monk)
XXX BCE Rise of Parthia (Ashkâniân), the second native dynasty of ancient Persia
XXX BCE Death of Emperor Ashoka; Decline of the Mauryan Empire
XXX BCE Emergence of Satavahanas in South India
XXX BCE Qin Shi Huang unifies China, end of Warring States period; marking the beginning of Imperial rule in China which lasts until XXXX. Construction of the Great Wall by the Qin Dynasty begins.
XXX BClE Kingdom of Nan Yue extends from Canton to North Việt Nam .
XXX BCE Han Dynasty established in China, after the death of Qin Shi Huang; China in this period officially becomes a Confucian state and opens trading connections with the West, i.e. the Silk Road.
XXX BCE Scipio Africanus defeats Hannibal at Battle of Zama.
XXX BCE El Mirador, largest early Maya city, flourishes.
XXX BCE Paper is invented in China.
c. XXX BCE Chera dynasty in South India.
XXX BC Shunga Empire founded.
XXX–XXX BCE Maccabean Revolt.
XXX–XXX BCE Third Punic War between Rome and Carthage. War ends with the complete destruction of Carthage, allowing Rome to conquer modern day Tunisia and Libya.
XXX BCE Roman conquest of Greece, see Roman Greece
XXX BCE Roman armies enter Gaul for the first time.
XXX BCE First Chinese domination of Việt Nam in the form of the Nanyue Kingdom.
c. XXX BCE Chola dynasty rises in prominence.
XXXBCE-XXXAD Bantu speaking communities in the great lakes region of Africa develop iron forging techniques that enable them to produce carbon steel.XX
XXXBCE-XXXAD The earliest Bantu settlements in the Swahili coast appear on the archaeological record in Kwale in Kenya, Misasa in Tanzania and Ras Hafun in Somalia.XX
c. XX BCE Burebista becomes the king of Dacia.
c. XX BCE The Siege of Jerusalem (XX BC) leads to the conquest of Judea by the Romans.
c. XX BCE- XX BCE Burebista conquers territories from south Germany to Thrace,reaching the coast of the Aegean sea.
XX BCE Roman Civil War between Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great.
XX BCE Julius Caesar murdered by Marcus Brutus and others; End of Roman Republic; beginning of Roman Empire.
XX BCE Burebista is assassinated in the same year like Julius Caesar and his empire breaks into X and later X kingdoms in modern-day Romania.
XX BCE The Roman conquest of Egypt.
XX BCE Cleopatra ends her reign as the last active ruler of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt
XX BCE Formation of Roman Empire Octavius is given titles of Princeps and Augustus by Roman Senate - beginning of Pax Romana. Formation of influential Praetorian Guard to provide security to Emperor
XX-XXBCE Amanirenas, the kandake(Queen) of the Kingdom of Kush, leads Kushite armies against the RomansXXXXXX
XX BCE Three Kingdoms period begins in Korea. The temple of Jerusalem is reconstructed.
X BCE Earliest theorized date for birth of Jesus of Nazareth. Roman succession Gaius Caesar and Lucius Caesar groomed for the throne.
X BCE Widely accepted date (Ussher) for birth of Jesus Christ.
c. X-XX The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, a graeco-roman manuscript is written. It describes an established Indian Ocean Trade routeXX
X Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, the Imperial Roman Army's bloodiest defeat.
XX Death of Emperor Augustus (Octavian), ascension of his adopted son Tiberius to the throne.
XX-XX Crucifixion of Jesus Christ, exact date unknown.
XX Death of Emperor Tiberius, ascension of his nephew Caligula to the throne.
XX Rome conquers Mauretania.
XX Emperor Caligula is assassinated by the Roman senate. His uncle Claudius succeeds him.
XX Rome enters Britain for the first time.
XX Emperor Claudius dies and is succeeded by his grand nephew Nero.
XX Emperor Nero commits suicide, prompting the Year of the four emperors in Rome.
XX Destruction of Jerusalem by the armies of Titus.
XX Destruction of Pompeii by the volcano Vesuvius.
XX After a two-year rule, Emperor Nerva dies of natural causes, his adopted son Trajan succeeds him.
XXX-XXX Kingdom of Aksum in the Horn of Africa
XXX-XXX Roman Empire at largest extent under Emperor Trajan after having conquered modern-day Romania, Iraq and Armenia.
XXX Trajan dies of natural causes. His adopted son Hadrian succeeds him. Hadrian pulls out of Iraq and Armenia.
XXX Construction of Hadrian's Wall begins.
XXX Hadrian completes the Pantheon in Rome.
XXX Hadrian dies of natural causes. His adopted son Antoninus Pius succeeds him.
XXX Death of Antoninus Pius. His rule was the only one in which Rome did not fight in a war.
XXX Marcus Aurelius becomes emperor of the Roman Empire.
XXX Reign of Marcus Aurelius officially ends.
XXX - XXX Commodus becomes Roman Emperor.
XXX Kingdom of Champa in Central Việt Nam.
XXXs The Buddhist Srivijaya Empire established in Maritime Southeast Asia.
XXX Three Kingdoms period begins in China after the fall of Han Dynasty.
XXX Fall of the Parthian Empire and Rise of the Sassanian Empire.
XXX Defeat of Gordian III (XXX–XXX), Philip the Arab (XXX–XXX), and Valerian (XXX–XXX), by Shapur I of Persia, (Valerian was captured by the Persians).
XXX Emperor Wu established Jin Dynasty providing a temporary unity of China after the devastating Three Kingdoms period.
XXX Diocletian becomes emperor of Rome and splits the Roman Empire into Eastern and Western Empires.
XXX Diocletian begins a large-scale persecution of Christians.
XXX The capital of the Roman empire is officially moved from Rome to Mediolanum (modern day Milan).
XXX-XXXX Growth of Azanian and Zanj settlements in the Swahili coast. Local industry and international trade flourish. XX
XXX Diocletian's edict on prices
XXX Edict of Milan declared that the Roman Empire would tolerate all forms of religious worship.
XXX Constantine I organizes the First Council of Nicaea.
XXX Constantinople is officially named and becomes the capital of the eastern Roman Empire.
XXX Samudragupta becomes the emperor of the Gupta empire.
XXX Emperor Constantine I dies, leaving his sons Constantius II, Constans I, and Constantine II as the emperors of the Roman empire.
XXX Constantius II is left sole emperor with the death of his two brothers.
XXX Birth of Augustine of Hippo
XXX Constantius II dies, his cousin Julian succeeds him.
XXX Battle of Adrianople, Roman army is defeated by the Germanic tribes.
XXX Roman Emperor Theodosius I declares the Arian faith of Christianity heretical.
XXX Theodosius I outlaws all religions other than Catholic Christianity.
XXX Romans are expelled from Britain.
XXX-XXX Visigoths and other Germanic tribes cross into Roman-Gaul for the first time.
XXX Visigoths sacks Rome for the first time since XXX BC.
XXX Germanic tribes enter Spain.
XXX Vandals enter North Africa from Spain for the first time
XXX Vandals have conquered the land stretching from Morocco to Tunisia by this time.
XXX Vandals sack Rome, capture Sicily and Sardinia.
c. XXX Skandagupta repels an Indo-Hephthalite attack on India.
XXX Romulus Augustus, last Western Roman Emperor is forced to abdicate by Odoacer, a chieftain of the Germanic Heruli; Odoacer returns the imperial regalia to Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno in Constantinople in return for the title of dux of Italy; most frequently cited date for the end of ancient history.
XXX – XXX Chandragupta II reigns over the golden age of the Gupta Empire.
XXX – XXX The Chinese Buddhist monk Faxian sails through the Indian Ocean and travels throughout Sri Lanka and India to gather Buddhist scriptures.
XXX Kumarajiva, a Buddhist monk and translator of sutras into Chinese, arrives in Chang'an
Early Xth century – Baptistry of Neon, Ravenna, Italy, is built.
Xth century - North Acropolis, Tikal, Guatemala, is built. Maya culture.
XXX Mesrop Mashtots introduces number XX of the XX letters of the newly created Armenian Alphabet
XXX The eastern frontier of the Western Roman Empire collapses as waves of Suebi, Alans, and Vandals cross the then frozen river Rhine near Mainz and enter Gaul.
XXX Constantine III leads many of the Roman military units from Britain to Gaul and occupies Arles (Arelate). This is generally seen as Rome's withdrawal from Britain.
XXX Rome ransacked by the Visigoths led by King Alaric.
XXX Suebi establish the first independent Christian kingdom of Western Europe in Gallaecia.
XXX St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, begins to write The City of God.
XXX – XXX Kumaragupta, Gupta emperor
XXX The Jin dynasty comes to an end by Liu Yu.
XXX – XXX Northern and Southern dynasties in China.
XXX K'inich Yax K'uk' Mo' re-established Copan.

Copan

XXX The Ilopango volcano erupts, thereby devastating the Mayan cities in present-day El Salvador.
XXX First Council of Ephesus, the third ecumenical council which upholds the title Theotokos or "mother of God", for Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ.
XXX Vandals conquer Carthage.
At some point after XXX, the Anglo-Saxons settle in Britain. The traditional story is that they were invited there by Vortigern.
XXX Historical linguist Albert C. Baugh dates Old English from around this year.X
XXX Several stone inscriptions were made witness to edicts from West Java. Amongst others, the Tugu inscription announced decrees of Purnavarman, the King of Tarumanagara, one of the earliest Hindu kingdoms of Java (up until the year XXX)
XXX Council of Chalcedon, the fourth ecumenical council which taught Jesus Christ as one divine person in two natures.
XXX The Persians declare war on the Armenians.
XXX The Huns under Attila facing the Romans and the Visigoths are defeated in the Battle of Chalons.X
XXX The Metropolis of Aquileia is destroyed by Attila the Hun and his army.
XXX Pope Leo I meets in person with Attila on the Mincio River and convinces him not to ransack Rome.
XXX Death of Attila. The Hunnic Empire is divided between Attila's sons.
XXX Battle of Nedao. Germanic tribes destroy the main Hunnic army and do away with Hunnic domination.
XXX Vandals sack Rome.
XXX The city of Chichen Itza is founded in Mexico.
XXX – XXX Skandagupta, the last great Gupta emperor
XXX Death of Dengizich, last Khan of the Hunnic Empire.
XXX Riothamus, King of the Britons, helps the Roman Emperor in Brittany against the Visigoths.
XXX Deposition of Romulus Augustulus by Odoacer traditional date for the Fall of Rome in the West.
XXX or XXX Chan Buddhists found the Shaolin Monastery on Mount Song in Henan, China.
XXX Assassination of Julius Nepos, the last de jure Emperor of the Western Roman Empire, in Dalmatia.
XXX Clovis I becomes King of the Western Franks upon the death of Childeric I.
XXX This year, the territory of modern Ukraine established Kiev.X
XXX Clovis defeats Syagrius and conquers the last free remnants of the Western Roman Empire.
XXX (approximate date) Battle of Mount Badon. According to legend, British forces led by Arthur defeated the invading Saxons.
XXX King Clovis I defeats and subjugates the Kingdom of Thuringia in Germany.
XXX Theodoric the Great ousts Odoacer to become King of Italy.
XXX Northern Gaul is united under the Frankish King Clovis I, founder of the Merovingian dynasty.
XXX Battle of Tolbiac. King Clovis subjugates the Alamanni, and is baptized as a Catholic with a large number of Franks by Remigius, bishop of Reims.
Buddhism reaches Burma and Indonesia.
African and Indonesian settlers reach Madagascar.
The Hopewell tradition comes to an end in North America.
Tbilisi was founded by King Vakhtang Gorgasali.

Early Xth century – Ah Suytok Tutul Xiu founds Uxmal.

Uxmal

Early Xth century – Archangel Michael, panel of a diptych probably from the court workshop at Constantinople, is made. It is now kept at The British Museum, London.
Early Xth century – Page with Rebecca at the Well, from "Book of Genesis", probably made in Syria or Palestine, is made. It is now kept at Österreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna.
By Xth century – Shilpa Shastras is written.
Early Xth century – first academy of the east the Academy of Gundeshapur founded in Iran by Khosrau I of Persia.
Early Xth century – Irish colonists and invaders, the Scots, began migrating to Caledonia (later known as Scotland). Migration from south-west Britain to Brittany.
Early Xth century – Glendalough monastery, Wicklow Ireland founded on St. Kevin. Many similar foundations in Ireland and Wales.
Early Xth century – Zen Buddhism enters Vietnam from China.
Early Xth century – Haniwa, from Kyoto, is made during the Kofun period
Early Xth century – Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe's apse's mosaic is completed.
XXX Chinese annals mentioned the existence of the Buddhist Kingdom, Kanto Lim in South Sumatra, presumably in the neighborhood of present-day Palembang.
XXX Battle of Vouillé
XXX Eastern Roman Emperor Anastasius I dies and is succeeded by Justin I.
XXX Byzantines obtain silkworm eggs and begin silkworm cultivation
c. XXX Boethius writes his Consolation of Philosophy.
XXX Having settled in Rome c. XXX, Scythian monk Dionysius Exiguus invents the Anno Domini era calendar based on the estimated birth year of Jesus Christ.
XXX Justinian I succeeds Justin I as Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire.
XXX Saint Benedict of Nursia founds the monastery of Monte Cassino in Italy.
XXX Nika riots in Constantinople; the cathedral is destroyed. They are put down a week later by Belisarius and Mundus; up to XX,XXX people are killed in the Hippodrome.
XXX Postulated volcanic eruption in the tropics which causes several years of abnormally cold weather, resulting in mass famine in the Northern Hemisphere. (See Extreme weather events of XXX–XXX.)
XXX Battle of Camlann, final battle of legendary King Arthur.
XXX–XXX First pandemic of bubonic plague (Plague of Justinian) hits Constantinople and the rest of Byzantine Empire.
XXX/XXX One of Justinian's edict leads to the Three-Chapter Controversy
XXX Nubian Kingdom of Nobatia converts to Christianity.
Mid-Xth century – Cassiodorus founds a cenobitic monastery and scriptorium at Vivarium in Italy
Mid-Xth century – Buddhist Jataka stories are translated into Persian by order of the Zoroastrian king Khosrau.
Mid-Xth century – Cave-Temple of Shiva at Elephanta Caves, Maharashtra, India, is built. Post-Gupta period.
Mid-Xth century – Eternal Shiva, rock-cut relief in the Cave-Temple of Shiva at Elephanta Caves, is made
Mid-Xth century – Jogeshwari Caves excavated during Xth century A.D. is one of the finest specimen of Brahmanical Rock-Cut Architecture and bears similarity with Elephanta Caves (Cave No. X) and Dhumar Lena (Cave No. XX) at Ellora Caves.
Second half of Xth century – Virgin and Child with Saints and Angels, icon, is made. It is now kept at Saint Catherine's Monastery, Egypt.
XXX Kingdom of Funan dies out.
XXX Bumin Khagan founded the Turkic Khaganate in the Central Asia
XXX Buddhism introduced to Japan from Baekje during the Asuka period.
XXX Second Council of Constantinople
XXX Eviction of the Ostrogoths from Rome, and the re-unification of all Italy under Byzantine rule.
XXX to XXX Buddhist monk Jnanagupta translates XX sutras from Sanskrit to Chinese.
XXX The monastery on Iona is founded by St. Columba.
XXX Birth of Lǐ Yuān, founder of the Tang Dynasty and Emperor of China under the name of Gaozu (XXX-XXX)
XXX Lombards invade Italy and establish a federation of dukedoms under a king.
XXX Nubian kingdom of Alodia converts to Christianity.
XXX Nubian kingdom of Makuria converts to Christianity.
XXX Birth of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad.
XXX The Byzantine empire is invaded by various Slavs, who plunder the Balkans.
XXX China's Chen Dynasty invents matches.
XXX The world's oldest ongoing company, Kongō Gumi, is founded in Osaka, Japan.
XXX–XXX Reign of Persian Shah Hormizd IV.
XXX–XXX Reign of Byzantine Emperor Maurice.
XXX Suebian Kingdom conquered by Visigoths in Spain.
XXX Reccared, king of the Visigoths in Spain, converts to Catholicism.
XXX Shivadeva ascends the throne of the Lichchhavi dynasty in Nepal.
XXX Third Council of Toledo adds the "filioque" clause to the Nicene Creed in Spain.
XXX China reunified under the Sui Dynasty (XXX – XXX).
XXX Gregory the Great succeeds Pope Pelagius II (who dies of plague) as the XXth pope.
XXX Beginning of the Bengali Calendar or (বঙ্গাব্দ Bônggabdô or Banggabda).
XXX Pope Gregory sends Roman monks led by Augustine to England.
Islam begins in Arabia; the Quran is documented.
The first known Croatian archon Porga establishes the Duchy of Croatia.
The world's population shrinks to about XXX million people.X
The Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy emerges at the beginning of this century or the last in England.X
Sutton Hoo ship burial, East Anglia (modern England).
Xuanzang traveled from China to India, before returning to Chang'an in China to translate Buddhist scriptures.
Timgad, Algeria, is destroyed by Berbers.
End of sporadic Buddhist rule in the Sindh.
Croats enter their present territory early in the Xth century, settling in six distinct tribal delimitations.
Teotihuacan is sacked. The political and religious buildings are burned.
The religion of Shugendō evolves from Buddhism, Taoism, Shinto and other influences in the mountains of Japan.
The Bulgars arrive in the Balkans; establishment of the powerful Bulgarian Empire.
Arab traders penetrate the area of Lake Chad.
Earliest attested English poetry.
Side panels, Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe, are made.
Main compound, Hōryū-ji, Nara Prefecture, is built. Asuka period.
Xth and Xth century – Mosaics above apse, Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe, are made.
XXX Smallpox spreads from India into Europe.
XXX The Third Chinese domination of Vietnam starts following the collapse of the Early Lý dynasty.
XXX Last mention of the Roman Senate in Gregorian Register. It mentions that the senate acclaimed the statues of emperor Phocas and empress Leontia.X
XXX Pope Boniface III elected to the papacy on the death of Pope Sabinian. He sought and obtained a decree from Byzantine Emperor Phocas which stated that "the See of Blessed Peter the Apostle should be the head of all the Churches". This ensured that the title of "Universal Bishop" belonged exclusively to the Bishop of Rome.
XXX Hōryū-ji temple believed to have been completed by XXX in Ikaruga, Japan.
XXX Heraclius arrives by ship from Africa at Constantinople, overthrows Eastern Roman Emperor Phocas and becomes Emperor. His first major act is to change the official language of the Eastern Roman Empire from Latin to Greek (already the language of the vast majority of the population).
XXX The Sasanian Empire under Shah Khosrow II sacks Jerusalem, taking away the relic of the True Cross.X
XXX Pacal the Great becomes king of the Mayan city-state of Palenque
XXX Shah Khosrow II invades Egypt.X
XXX Æthelfrith of Northumbria defeats the Welsh in a battle at Chester in England.
XXX Tang dynasty of China do initiated by Li Yuan.
XXX The Chenla kingdom completely absorbed Funan.
Guangzhou, China, becomes a major international seaport, hosting maritime travelers from Egypt, East Africa, Arabia, Persia, India, Sri Lanka, and South East Asia, including Muslims, Jews, Hindus, and Nestorian Christians.
XXX Year one of the Islamic calendar begins, during which the Hegira occurs—Muhammad and his followers emigrate from Mecca to Medina in September.
XXX The Frankish merchant Samo, supporting the Slavs fighting their Avar rulers, becomes the ruler of the first known Slav state in Central Europe.
XXX The Avars, the Slavs and the Persians jointly besiege but fail to capture Constantinople.
XXX Emperor Heraclius defeats the Persians, ending the Roman–Persian Wars.
XXX The Arab–Byzantine wars begin. Much of the Roman Empire is conquered by Muslim Arabs led by Khalid ibn al-Walid.
XXX–XXX Tang campaign against the Eastern Turks, Chinese Tang dynasty forces under commanders Li Jing and Li Shiji destroy the Göktürk Khanate.
XXX The Muslim conquests begin.
XXX-XXX Alopen, a Persian Christian priest, introduces Nestorian Christianity into China.
XXX Around this time the Battle of al-Qadisiyyah resulted in a decisive victory for Muslims in the Muslim conquest of Persia, the Persian Empire is conquered by Muslim Arabs led by Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas.
XXX Emperor Taizong (XXX-XXX) issues an edict of universal toleration of religions; Nestorian Christians build a church in Chang'an.
XXX Muslim conquest of Palestine.
XXX Muslim conquest of Egypt and Armenia.
XXX Unsuccessful revolt of Ashina Jiesheshuai of the Turkic people against Tang China.
XXX The Coptic period, in its more specific definition, ends when Islam is introduced into Egypt.
XXX-XXX Chinese Emperor Gaozong permits establishment of Christian monasteries in each of XXX prefectures.
XXX The Arab–Khazar wars begin.

The Tang dynasty Giant Wild Goose Pagoda of Chang'an, built in XXX, in modern-day Xi'an, China.

Mid-Xth century – Durga Mahishasura-mardini (Durga as Slayer of the Buffalo Demon), rock-cut relief, Mamallapuram, Tamil Nadu, India, is made. Pallava period. It is now kept at Asian Art Archives, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Mid-Xth century - Portrait of Lord Pacal, from his tomb, Temple of the Inscriptions, Palenque, Mexico, is made. Maya culture. It is now kept at National Museum of Anthropology, Mexico City.
c. mid-Xth century – Dharmaraja Ratha, Mamallapuram, Tamil Nadu, India, is built. Pallava period.
XXX Emperor Yazdegerd III is murdered in Merv, ending the rule of Sassanid dynasty in Persia (Iran).
XXX–XXX The First Fitna.
XXX The Chinese Tang dynasty under Emperor Gaozong of Tang defeats Western Turkic Kaganate.
XXX Two Chinese monks, Zhi Yu and Zhi You, reconstruct the Xrd century south-pointing chariot mechanical compass-vehicle for Emperor Tenji of Japan.
XXX Caliph Ali ibn Abi Talib is assassinated. His successor Hasan ibn Ali abdicated the Caliphate to Muawiyah I, marking the beginning of the Umayyad Caliphate.X
XXX The Tang dynasty of China and Korean Silla Kingdom gain victory against the Korean Baekje Kingdom and their Yamato Japanese allies in the naval Battle of Baekgang.
XXX Conquest of Kabul by Muslims.
XXX A Tang dynasty Chinese source written by I-tsing, mentioned about Holing (Kalingga) kingdom, located somewhere in the northern coast of Central Java.X
XXX The end of the Goguryeo–Tang War, as Goguryeo fell to a joint attack by Tang China and Unified Silla of Korea, the latter of which held the former Goguryeo domains.
XXX In XXX an Arab Muslim army under Uqba ibn Nafi entered the region of Ifriqiya. In the late XXXs conquest of North Africa was completed.
XXX I-tsing visited Srivijaya and Malayu in Sumatra and Kedah in Malay peninsula on his way to Nalanda, India.X
XXX The first Arab siege of Constantinople begins.
XXX Most of the Arab fleet is destroyed by Greek fire; the Persian crown prince flees to the T'ang court.
XXX Decisive victory of the Bulgars over the Byzantines in the Battle of Ongal.
XXX Battle of Karbala took place near Kufa, which resulted in the death of Husayn ibn Ali and the division of Muslim community.
XXX Bulgaria is recognized as independent country by the Byzantine Empire.
XXX Revival of the Turkic Khaganate by the efforts of Ilterish Qaghan and Tonyukuk
XXX Dapunta Hyang Sri Jayanasa performed Siddhayatra as the journey to expand his influence. The event mentioned in several inscriptions such as Telaga Batu inscription, Talang Tuo inscription and Kedukan Bukit inscription. The beginning of Srivijaya hegemony over the maritime region around Malacca Strait and Sunda Strait.X
XXX–XXX The Second Fitna.
XXX Srivijaya launch a naval invasion of Java, which is mentioned in Kota Kapur inscription. This likely contributed to the end of Tarumanagara kingdom.X
XXX I-tsing returned to Srivijaya in on his way back from India to China. In his record he reported that the Kingdom of Malayu was captured by Srivijaya.X
XXX Emperor Justinian II of the Byzantine Empire defeats the Bulgarians.
XXX Pro-Buddhist imperial consort Wu Zetian seizes power and rules as Empress of China.
XXX Buddhism is made the state religion of China.
XXX The Arabs capture Carthage from the Byzantine Empire.
XXX Active but unofficial anti-Christian persecution begins in China
XXX North–South States Period begins in Korea.
XXX The Mount Edziza volcanic complex erupts in northern British Columbia, Canada.
XXX The Sumatra-based Srivijaya naval kingdom flourishes and declines (to XXXX)
XXX Wet-field rice cultivation, small towns and kingdoms flourish. Trade links are established with China and India.XX
XXX The Sojomerto inscription, possibly dated around late Xth century, is discovered in Batang, Central Java. It mentions Dapunta Selendra, possibly the ancestor of Sailendra dynasty. The inscription was written in Old Malay, suggesting a Srivijayan link to this family.XX
Estimated century in which the poem Beowulf is composed.
Classical Maya civilization begins to decline.
The first Serbian state is formed at the beginning of the century.
Buddhist Jataka stories are translated into Syriac and Arabic as Kalilag and Damnag.
An account of Buddha's life is translated into Greek by Saint John of Damascus, and widely circulated to Christians as the story of Barlaam and Josaphat.
Height of the Classic period in pre-Columbian Maya civilization history.
Śāntideva, a Buddhist monk at Nalanda Monastery in India, composes the famous Bodhicharyāvatāra, or Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life.
The height of the Giant Wild Goose Pagoda in Xian, China is extended by X stories.
XXX The Taihō Code is enacted in late Asuka period Japan.
XXX Overthrow of Empress Wu Zetian, the reign of China's first and only sole-ruling empress ends.
XXX Justinian II is forced to give the title Caesar of Byzantium to the Bulgarian Emperor Tervel. The Byzantine Empire begins to pay annual tributes to Bulgaria.
XXX – XXX The Bulgarians defeat Justinian II at the battle of Anchiallus. Arab armies occupied Sindh.X
XXX Empress Genmei moves the capital to Heijō-kyū (present day Nara), initiating the Nara period of Japan.
XXX Palenque is conquered by Toniná.

A prisoner from Palenque in Toniná

XXX Tariq ibn Ziyad crosses the Straits of Gibraltar With the creation of Al-Andalus, most of the Iberian Peninsula is conquered by Arab and Berber Muslims, thus ending the Visigothic rule, and beginning almost eight centuries of Muslim rule.
XXX Liutprand, King of the Lombards begins his reign (until XXX).
c. XXX Metropolitan episcopal see is established by the Church of the East in Chinese capital of Chang'an.
XXX – XXX Emperor Xuanzong reigned, the time was considered one of China's high points.
XXX – XXX Caliphate campaigns in India
XXX Death of Dajian Huineng, sixth and last Patriarch of Chán Buddhism.
XXX - Treaty of Tudmir, signed between Abd al-'Aziz, the commander of Muslim troops invaidibng Spain and Theodemir, the Christian king of a southern region is Spain.
XXX – XXX Siege of Constantinople. The Bulgarians and the Byzantines decisively defeat the invading Arabs, thus halting the Arab advance toward Europe.
XXX Sri Indravarman King of Srivijaya send a letter to the Caliph Umar bin Abdul Aziz of the Umayyad Caliphate in Damascus, signing early ancient Indonesian official contact with Islamic world in the Middle East.X
XXX Byzantine Emperor Leo III the Isaurian destroys the icon of Christ above the Chalke Gate in the capital city of Constantinople, beginning the first phase of the Byzantine Iconoclasm.
XXX Bede completes his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum (Ecclesiastical History of the English People).X
XXX Battle of Tours. Near Poitiers, France, leader of the Franks Charles Martel and his men defeat a large army of Moors under the governor of Cordoba, Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi, who is killed during the battle. The Battle of Tours halts the advance of Islam into Western Europe and establishes a balance of power between Western Europe, Islam and the Byzantine Empire.
XXX The Sanjaya dynasty is founded around this time according to the Canggal inscription.X

An Xth-century Tang dynasty Chinese clay figurine of a Sogdian man (an Eastern Iranian person) wearing a distinctive cap and face veil, possibly a camel rider or even a Zoroastrian priest engaging in a ritual at a fire temple, since face veils were used to avoid contaminating the holy fire with breath or saliva; Museum of Oriental Art (Turin), Italy.X
XXX Quiriguá declares independence from Copan
XXX Battle of Akroinon. Byzantines win their first large-scale victory in a pitched battle against the Arabs.
XXX For the municipal census of the Tang-dynasty Chinese capital city Chang'an and its metropolitan area of Jingzhou Fu (including small towns in the vicinity), the New Book of Tang records that in this year there were XXX,XXX registered families with X,XXX,XXX persons.
XXX The Chinese Buddhist monk Jian Zhen writes in his Yue Jue Shu of the international sea traffic coming to Guangzhou, ships from Borneo, Persia, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and others bringing tons of goods.
XXX The last Umayyad Caliph Marwan II (XXX–XXX) is overthrown and executed by the first Abbasid Caliph, Abu al-Abbas al-Saffah. The Caliphate is moved to Baghdad which would later develop into a centre of trade and culture. The Ghana Empire begins in western Africa.
mid-Xth century - Great Wild Goose Pagoda at Ci'en Temple, Xi'an, Shanxi, is rebuilt.
c. mid-Xth century - Camel Carrying a Group of Musicians, from a tomb near Xi'an, Shanxi, is made. Tang dynasty. It is now kept at Museum of Chinese History, Beijing.
XXX Arabian armies defeat Chinese Tang dynasty troops in the Battle of Talas, in the high Pamirs near Samarkand, and conquer Central Asia completely.
XXX The Hindu Medang (Mataram) kingdom flourishes and declines (to XXXX)
XXX – XXX The An Shi Rebellion devastates China during the mid Tang dynasty.
XXX King Offa of Mercia becomes dominant ruler in England.
XXX Arab and Persian pirates and travelers burn and loot the Chinese city of Guangzhou, while the Tang Dynasty authorities shut the port down for the next five decades.
XXX The construction of the famous Indonesian Buddhist structure Borobudur began, probably as a non-Buddhist shrine.X
Borobudur in Indonesia
XXX Pepin dies; Charles becomes king at Noyan and his brother Carloman becomes king at Soissons.
XXX's – XXX's Java launched series of naval raids on ports of Dai Viet, Champa and Cambodia; Sontay in Tonkin (XXX); Nha Trang (XXX); captured Indrapura in Cambodia (XXX); Phan Rang (XXX). The naval raids was probably launched by Sailendran-Srivijayan Maharaja Dharmasetu or Dharanindra.X
XXX – XXX Charlemagne invades what is now northwestern Germany, battling the Saxons for more than thirty years and finally crushing their rebellion, incorporating Saxony into the Frankish Empire and the Christian world.
XXX Kalasan temple constructed, according to the Kalasan inscription.
XXX Nestorian Monument is erected in China.
XXX Buddhist monk Prajna reaches Chang'an and translates the sutras into Chinese.
XXX The Tang dynasty begins landing regular maritime missions on the coast of East Africa, cutting out middlemen Arab sea merchants.
XXX – XXX Chinese geographer Jia Dan describes large lighthouse pillars built in the Persian Gulf, which is confirmed a century later by al-Mas'udi and al-Muqaddasi.
XXX The Empress Irene of Athens convenes the Seventh Ecumenical Council, ending the first phase of Byzantine Iconoclasm.
XXX Battle of Marcelae. The Bulgarian victory over the Byzantines marks the end of the half-century political instability in Bulgaria.
XXX The Manjusrigrha (Sewu) temple is completed according to Manjusrigrha inscription.
XXX The first written account of a Viking raid carried out on the abbey of Lindisfarne in northern England.
XXX The Frisian–Frankish wars come to an end with the last uprising of the Frisians.
XXX Emperor Kanmu moves the capital to Heian-kyō (present day Kyoto), initiating the Heian period of Japan.
XXX An Arab fleet sails up the Tiber.
XXX – XXX Rule of Aghlabids as an independent Muslim dynasty in North Africa, with their capital at Tunis.
XXX Beginning of the ancient West African state of Takrur or Tekrour, which flourished roughly parallel to the Ghana Empire.
XXX On Christmas Day, Charlemagne is crowned the first Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Leo III.
XXX The agriculturally based Buddhist Sailendra kingdom flourishes and declines (to XXX)
An unknown event causes the decline of the Maya Classical Era.
Beowulf might have been written down in this century; alternatively, it could also have been in the Xth century.
Reign of Charlemagne, and concurrent (and controversially labeled) Carolingian Renaissance in Western Europe.
Large-scale Viking attacks on Europe begin, devastating countless numbers of people.
Oseberg ship burial.
The Magyars begin their conquest of Pannonia (roughly modern-day Hungary), a process that will take several decades to be completed.
The Tukolor settle in the Senegal river valley.
Muslim traders settle in the northwest and southeast of Madagascar.
XXX Jayavarman II of the Khmer people in Cambodia founds the Khmer empire and establishes the Angkorian dynasty.
XXX Construction on the Leshan Giant Buddha in Tang Dynasty China is complete, after XX years of rock-carving on a massive cliff-side.
XXX – XXX Tang Dynasty was under the rule of Emperor Xianzong of Tang.
XXX – XXX War between the Byzantine empire and Bulgaria.
XXX Battle of Pliska fought between a Byzantine force led by emperor Nicephorus I and a Bulgarian army commanded by Khan Krum. Byzantines are defeated in a series of engagements, culminating with the death of Nicephorus I.
XXX Byzantines are heavily defeated by the Bulgars at Versinikia.
XXX China is reunited.clarification needed
c. XXX – c. XXX Period of serious Arab naval raids on shores of Tyrrhenian and Adriatic seas.
XXX Charlemagne dies in the city of Aachen.
XXX A XX-year peace agreement is signed between Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire.
XXX Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī writes his treatise on Algebra The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing.
XXX Han Yu dies.
XXX Battle of Ellandun King Egbert of Wessex defeats Mercia and establishes the kingdom of Wessex as the supreme Kingdom in England.
XXX Borobudur is completed during the reign of Samaratungga.XX

Borobudur was likely founded around XXX This corresponds to the period between XXX and XXX, the peak of the Sailendra dynasty in central Java,X when it was under the influence of the Srivijayan Empire. The construction has been estimated to have taken XX years and been completed during the reign of Samaratungga in XXX.XX

XXX – XXX Aghlabid dynasty colonises emirates in Sicily and subsequently raids Southern Italy.
XXX The Ghana (Wagadu) Empire is established.
XXX The House of Wisdom, a library and translation institute established in Baghdad by al-Ma'mun, Abbasid caliph, to transfer the knowledge of Greeks, Persians, Indians, etc. to the Muslim world. The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing, a book of algebra, is also written there by Al-Khwarizmi.
XXX Sweet Dew Incident occurs. Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty conspires to kill the powerful eunuchs of the Tang court, but the plot is foiled.
XXX-XXX Vlastimir defeats Presian.
XXX Death of Louis the Pious.
XXX Dublin is founded on the east coast of Ireland by the Vikings.
XXX Samaale becomes chief of the Hashiyah clan and launches the conquest of Somalia. This paves the way for Hashiyic colonisation of the Peninsular, displacing the native Cushitic peoples of Somalia
XXX The Carolingian Empire is at its height in territory and area The three sons of Louis the Pious reach an agreement known as the Treaty of Verdun and split the Carolingian empire into three divisions; East Francia was given to Louis the German, West Francia to Charles the Bald and Middle Francia to Lothair I.
XXX The first Viking raid in Iberia
XXX Buddhism is persecuted and banned in China.
XXX - XXX Emperor Xuānzong of Tang reigned. He was consideredby whom? the last capable emperor of the Tang dynasty.
XXX XX,XXX Saracen Arab squadrons from Africa, with XXX horses, desecrate Christian shrines in Rome, including the tombs and basilicas of Sts. Peter and Paul.
XXX – XXX The west bank of the Tiber is annexed into the city of Rome. A defensive wall, commissioned by Pope Leo IV, is built around what came to be called the Leonine City as a defensive response to the Saracen desecration of Rome in XXX.
XXX – XXX The first Norse settlers arrive on Iceland.
XXX The Arab merchant Sulaiman al-Tajir visits the Chinese seaport at Guangzhou in southern China, and observes the manufacturing of porcelain, the Islamic mosque built at Guangzhou, the granary system of the city, and how its municipal administration functioned.
XXX Prambanan is completed According to the Shivagrha inscription, Rakai Pikatan — the husband of Pramodhawardhani — defeated Balaputra.
XXX Muslims establish the University of Al Karaouine as a madrasa in Fez, Morocco.
XXX Balaputra, the maharaja of Suvarnadvipa and the ruler of Srivijaya, constructs the Buddhist temple and monastery in Nalanda India, on the land given by King Devapaladeva. of Pala in Benggala, according to the Nalanda inscription.X
XXX The beginning of the Rurik Dynasty in Rus'.
XXX The Chinese author Duan Chengshi describes the slave trade, ivory trade, and ambergris trade of Somalia in East Africa.
XXX The Bagratuni Dynasty of Medieval Armenia begins with Ashot I.
XXX – XXX Period of schism between Eastern and Western churches.
XXX Christianization of Bulgaria under Boris I
XXX Onward revival of the Byzantine Empire under the Macedonian dynasty.
XXX Ahmad ibn Tulun breaks away from the Abbasid Caliphate and establishes the independent Tulunid dynasty.
XXX An earthquake and tsunami struck Japan's Sanriku coast, killing X,XXX people.
XXX Christianization of the Serbs.
XXX Prague Castle founded.
XXX – XXX Reign of Alfred the Great, the first king of the English.
XXX Iceland settled by Ingolfur Arnarson from Norway.
XXX – XXX Huang Chao leads an unsuccessful rebellion against the Tang Dynasty in China.
XXX Battle of Ethandun results in the victory of Alfred the Great over the Danish warlord Guthrum.
XXX Arrival of the disciples of Saints Cyril and Methodius, Clement of Ohrid and Naum of Preslav in Bulgaria. Development of the Cyrillic Alphabet.
XXX The Carolingian Empire declines and falls after the death of Charles III.
XXX Council of Preslav - Vladimir-Rasate is dethroned and succeeded as Prince of Bulgaria by Simeon I; the capital is moved from Pliska to Preslav; the Byzantine clergy is expelled and replaced by Bulgarian; Old Bulgarian becomes the official language of the country.
XXX/XXX The year of the Magyars arrival in Pannonia. This year is widely accepted as the beginning of the Hungarian "Landtaking".
Late Xth century Bulgaria stretches from the mouth of the Danube to Epirus and Bosnia.
In Italy, some cities became free republics for instance Forlì, in XXX.
The Christian Nubian kingdom reaches its peak of prosperity and military power. (Early history of Sudan).
Harald Fairhair was victorious at the Battle of Hafrsfjord, and Norway was unified into one kingdom.
Chess reaches Japan.
The Medieval Warm Period begins.
The Coptic period, at its most broad definition, ends.
Page from Koran (Surah IIXXX and title Surah III) in kufic script, from Syria, is made. It is now kept at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
XXX King Alfred the Great of Wessex, First King of The English, dies.
Late Xth century – Pallava dynasty ends in Southern India.
Late Xth century - Womb World mandala, To-ji, Kyoto, is made. Heian period.
Xth – XXth century – Bowl with Kufic border, from Samarkand, Uzbekistan, is made. It is now kept at Musée du Louvre, Paris.
Laguna Copperplate Inscription, Kavi script, inscribed in Luzon, Philippines, dated Saka year XXX (XXX)
The beginning of the Medieval Warm Period
The Byzantine Empire reaches the height of its military and economic strength
c. XXX The Fatimid Caliphate arises in Kabylie, Kutama Tribe
c. XXX The Nri Kingdom in what is now Southeastern Nigeria starts.
c. XXX Al-Azhar University is established in Cairo by the Fatimid dynasty.
The Christian Nubian kingdom reaches its peak of prosperity and military power (Early history of Sudan)
Collapse of the central lowland Maya civilization. Post-Classic Maya period begins. Chichen Itza becomes a regional capital on the Yucatán Peninsula
Rise of the Toltecs in Mexico
Golden age of the Ancestral Puebloans (Pueblo II Era)
The Mississippian culture begins in present-day Southern United States
In XXX Ah Mekat Tutul Xiu unified Uxmal, Mayapan, and Chichen Itza founding The League of Mayapan.
Khazar kingdom is attacked and defeated by Kievan Rus (XXX)
Buddhist temple construction commences at Bagan, Burma
In XXX, Zhu Quanzhong deposes Emperor Ai of Tang and establishes a new Later Liang dynasty.
In XXX, Sumbing volcano erupts, according to Rukam inscription.
In XXX, King Balitung creates the Mantyasih inscription containing the list of Medang kings, moves the capital from Mamrati to Poh Pitu, and expands Prambanan temple.
In XXX, Parantaka I of the Chola Dynasty drives out the Pandyan from southern India into Lanka (now Sri Lanka), which he also eventually conquers.
In XXX, The Warmadewa dynasty rules Bali (to XXXX)
In XXX, the first use of gunpowder in battle occurs with the Chinese Battle of Langshan Jiang (Wolf Mountain River), where the Wuyue naval fleet under Qian Yuanguan defeats the Wu fleet. Qian had used flamethrowers ignited by gunpowder fuses to burn the Wu fleet.
In XXX, Ziyarid dynasty is established in northern Iran.
In XXX, During the reign of King Wawa, the capital of Medang Kingdom in Mataram is devastated, probably by the massive eruption of Mount Merapi.
In XXX, Mpu Sindok moves the seat of power of the Medang Kingdom from Mataram in Central Java to Tamwlang in East Java and establishes Isyana Dynasty. The shift is probably as a result of the eruption of Mount Merapi and/or invasion from Srivijaya.X
In XXXs, Persian Shia Buyid dynasty establishes and controls central and western part of Iran as well as most of Iraq.
In XXX, Goryeo Dynasty unifies Later Three Kingdoms of Korea.
In XXX, Mpu Sindok moves the capital again from Tamwlang to Watugaluh, both near bank of Brantas River in modern Jombang in East Java.
In XXX, Zhao Kuangyin establishes Song dynasty.
In XXX Seljuks convert to Islam.
In XXX, Ghaznavids dynasty, as the first Turk Sultanate, was established in Central Asia.
In XXX, Song dynasty reunites China.
In XXX's, Dynastic marriage between princess Mahendradatta of Javanese Isyanas and king Udayana of Balinese Warmadewas.
Coastal cities on the Malay Peninsula are the seed for the first recorded Malay kingdoms
In XXX, King Dharmawangsa of Medang kingdom launches a naval invasion on Palembang in an unsuccessful attempt to conquer Srivijaya. (to XXXX)
In XXX, Airlangga, son of King Udayana and Queen Mahendradatta was born in Bali.
In XXX, Dharmawangsa commissioned the translation of the Mahabharata into Old Javanese.X
In XXX, Samanid dynasty was defeated and conquered by Ghaznavids.
Viking groups settle in northern France
XXX Loire Vikings overrun Brittany; Breton court flees to the England of Edward the Elder.
The Norse become Normans
The Hungarian army destroys the Bavarian forces under duke Liutpold and king Louis the Child in the Battle of Pressburg. All the German force is annihilated.
XXX The Viking Rollo granted County of Rouen by France official foundation of Normandy.
Foundation of Cluny, first federated monastic order
Emperor Simeon the Great solidifies the First Bulgarian Empire as one of the most powerful states in Europe
In XXX (XX August XXX) the Bulgarians destroyed the Byzantine army in the Battle of Anchialus, one of the bloodiest battles in the Middle Ages
XXX official recognition of the first independent national Church in Europe, the Bulgarian Patriarchate
XXX Kingdom of England becomes a unified state.
c. XXX Gorm the Old becomes the first recognized king of Denmark, and thus the Danish Monarchy is founded.
XXX Alan II, with support from Æthelstan, commences the reconquest of Brittany.
XXX The Battle of Lechfeld (XX August XXX) sees a decisive victory for Otto I the Great, King of the Germans, over the Hungarian harka Bulcsú and the chieftains Lél (Lehel) and Súr.
XXX Battle of Silistra between Russians and Bulgars
Incursions of Magyar (Hungarian) cavalry throughout Western Europe (XX expeditions in Germany, Italy and France, XXX–XXX)
Mieszko I, first duke of Poland, baptised a Christian in XXX
Collapse of Great Moravia
XXX-XXX The Norseman Erik the Red begins the colonisation of Greenland.
The medieval Croatian state becomes a unified kingdom under King Tomislav
Swedish influence extends to the Black Sea
Volodymyr I, Prince of Kievan Rus', baptised a Christian in XXX
Reindeer and bears become extinct in Britain
Lions become extinct in Europe by this date, with the last dying in Caucasus.
Second half of the XXth century – Page with David the Psalmist, from the Paris Psalter, is made. It is now kept at Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris.
Late XXth or early XXth century – Archangel Michail, icon, is made. It is now kept at Treasury of the Cathedral of Saint Mark, Venice
Around XXXX Establishment of the Eastern Settlement and Western Settlement in Greenland.
Formation of the Tu'i Tonga Empire and of the Tuʻi Tonga dynasty in Tonga.
